README.md, before:


# NBA Salary Predictions

* **Goal**: Use different modeling techniques to try and accurately predict what the yearly salary of a player would be based on as seasonal player stats from the last 20 years
  * **Hidden Goal**  - To be *that guy*  that uses advanced Machine Learning models to predict salary worth when a friend complains that the Bucks overpaid for a player

-------------

## Getting the Data

* Was able to get game/season stats using [Sports Reference API](https://sportsreference.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) that pulls from [Sportsreference.com](www.sports-reference.com) and it took ***a lot*** of wrangling to pull together
  * [Feature Descriptions](https://sportsipy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/nba.html#module-sportsipy.nba.player)

    > * Some strange categories that end with `_percentage` (besides `Field-Goals`) are referring to `{Stat} per 100 possessions`
    > * Features include: `assist_percentage`, `block_percentage`, `defensive_rebound_percentage`, `offensive_rebound_percentage`, `steal_percentage`, `total_rebound_percentage`, `turnover_percentage`, `usage_percentage`

-------------

## Exploratory Data Analysis

* These functions that were partially taken from this [Towards DataScience Article](https://towardsdatascience.com/sports-reference-api-intro-dbce09e89e52) and also modified by myself to get all the info I needed to create created two DataFrames:
  * Season DataFrame (**Mainly used this one**):

    > * 61 Columns (`29 null columns` that were removed)
    > * **Target Feature** = `Avg_Salary`
    > * `Salary` gives career earnings in total up to that season, so for the target value I divided the Salary by the amount of years played at that point
    > * 13,235 Rows (Season data for players: Vince Carter claims most with 22 years)
    > * 2,033 Unique Players

  * Career DataFrame (Used mostly for EDA):
  
    > * 61 Columns (`29 null columns` that were removed)
    > * 2,040 Rows
    > * 2,033 Unique Players (Down to 1923 players after removing players without salaries)

* Highest Paid:   LeBron James         $17.2M
* Lowest Paid:    Kirk Penney          $4.5K

![salary hist](images/salary_hist.png)

### Trying to get an idea of what features contribute to a higher salary

* Showing average salaries over time:

![sal_overtime](images/avg_salaries_overtime.png)

* Features compared to Average Salary:

![features](images/feature_correlation.png)

-------------

## Linear Regression

* Training:

  > * Mean absolute error = 240,457.84
  > * Mean squared error = 127,441,167,125.65
  > * Median absolute error = 172,839.44
  > * Explain variance score = 0.42
  > * R2 score = 0.42

* Residuals plot:

![residual plot](images/residuals_train.png)

* Training Plot:

![Training Plot](images/linear_regression.png)

* Testing:

  > * Mean absolute error = 234,554.68
  > * Mean squared error = 123,912,975,078.46
  > * Median absolute error = 169,628.39
  > * Explain variance score = 0.44
  > * R2 score = 0.44

* Residuals plot ():

![residual test](images/residuals_test.png)

* Test Plot:

![Test Plot](images/linear_regression_test.png)

-------------

## Applying Neural Network to predict Salary of player

* Initially just tried a simple DNN that used 3 Dense `Relu` layers and `msle` as log function, ran over 10,000 epochs, results are shown below:

![Loss Chart](images/log_network_graph.png)

* Then tried running multiple DNN's using the following loss Functions:

```python
loss_functions = ['mae', 'mse', 'mape', 'msle', 'huber', 'logcosh']
```

* Model features (`first_hidden` is 20% of the numbers of rows in `X_train`):

```python
def build_and_compile_model(loss):
  model = keras.Sequential([
      layers.Dense(first_hidden, activation='relu', input_shape=[X_train.shape[1]]),
      layers.Dense(first_hidden//4, activation='relu'),
      layers.Dense(first_hidden//16, activation='relu'),
      layers.Dense(first_hidden//32, activation='relu'),
      layers.Dense(first_hidden//64, activation='relu'),
      layers.Dense(1, activation='linear')
  ])

  model.compile(loss=loss,optimizer=tf.keras.optimizers.Adam(0.0001),
                metrics=['mae'])
  return model
```

* Results of Training over 500 epochs:

```python
mae had a final val_loss of 202289.53125

mse had a final val_loss of 142236286976.0 # Squared error: 377,142.26

mape had a final val_loss of 68.57567596435547 # Percentage

msle had a final val_loss of 154.00787353515625 # Log error

huber had a final val_loss of 219148.109375

logcosh had a final val_loss of 201331.84375
```

* `Log_cosh` ends up slightly edging out the with it's final val_loss over mae

![mae](images/mae_network_graph.png)

![log_cosh](images/logcosh_network_graph.png)

* In practice it seems that these models consistently predict about `7 times less` than actual for your average player & up to `18 times less` for those outlier players with a **super max** deal

-------------

## Who shall we test with?

-------------

## Conclusions

* Without doing things like **clustering**, identifying **salary limitations** of the team that the player is on and **removing outliers** it's a bit hard to make a super accurate prediction
* A DNN will make a more accurate prediction than simple linear regression, however for most players it's really not going to make a reasonable difference

## References

* Used functions to create DataFrames from this [Towards DataScience Article](https://towardsdatascience.com/sports-reference-api-intro-dbce09e89e52)

* Players that are not currently playing do not have contract data, but can find contracts using [spotrac](https://www.spotrac.com/nba/)

-------------

## If only I had more time...

* Cluster NBA players into different positional categories based off season stats, then train Neural Network to predict something like win percentage (or perhaps have it categorize into something like [`Great Team`, `Good Team`, `Okay Team`, `Bad Team`, `Awful Team`])
  * Unfortunately the results I was getting using `KMeans Clustering` don't make any sense to me. Tried using both *career totals*, *per game averages* and *scaling the data*, but KMeans was suggesting between 2-3 clusters & decided that wouldn't make for a good proof of concept, hence the pivot to salary predictions
  * Regardless, here are some Scree Plots I'd created using `PCA`:

![PCA](images/pca_graph_minmax.png)

* And one of many Horizontal Bar Charts of the most common suggestions of clusters

![clusters](images/number_of_clusters_standard.png)

Commit message:

Modified a handful of names to comply with naming conventions, the API that was being used is not being updated anymore and portions are no longer working so may need to conenct to new DB showing in README

README.md, after:


# NBA Salary Predictions

* **Goal**: Use different modeling techniques to try and accurately predict what the yearly salary of a player would be based on as seasonal player stats from the last 20 years
  * **Hidden Goal**  - To be *that guy*  that uses advanced Machine Learning models to predict salary worth when a friend complains that the Bucks overpaid for a player

-------------

## Getting the Data

* Was able to get game/season stats using [Sports Reference API](https://sportsreference.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) that pulls from [Sportsreference.com](www.sports-reference.com) and it took ***a lot*** of wrangling to pull together
  * [Feature Descriptions](https://sportsipy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/nba.html#module-sportsipy.nba.player)

    > * Some strange categories that end with `_percentage` (besides `Field-Goals`) are referring to `{Stat} per 100 possessions`
    > * Features include: `assist_percentage`, `block_percentage`, `defensive_rebound_percentage`, `offensive_rebound_percentage`, `steal_percentage`, `total_rebound_percentage`, `turnover_percentage`, `usage_percentage`

* Sports Reference API no longer is working (for getting Teams data anyways), might want to look into just connecting with [this dataset](https://www.kaggle.com/wyattowalsh/basketball?select=daily_execution_pipeline.yml) from Wyatt Walsh

-------------

## Exploratory Data Analysis

* These functions that were partially taken from this [Towards DataScience Article](https://towardsdatascience.com/sports-reference-api-intro-dbce09e89e52) and also modified by myself to get all the info I needed to create created two DataFrames:
  * Season DataFrame (**Mainly used this one**):

    > * 61 Columns (`29 null columns` that were removed)
    > * **Target Feature** = `Avg_Salary`
    > * `Salary` gives career earnings in total up to that season, so for the target value I divided the Salary by the amount of years played at that point
    > * 13,235 Rows (Season data for players: Vince Carter claims most with 22 years)
    > * 2,033 Unique Players

  * Career DataFrame (Used mostly for EDA):
  
    > * 61 Columns (`29 null columns` that were removed)
    > * 2,040 Rows
    > * 2,033 Unique Players (Down to 1923 players after removing players without salaries)

* Highest Paid:   LeBron James         $17.2M
* Lowest Paid:    Kirk Penney          $4.5K

![salary hist](images/salary_hist.png)

### Trying to get an idea of what features contribute to a higher salary

* Showing average salaries over time:

![sal_overtime](images/avg_salaries_overtime.png)

* Features compared to Average Salary:

![features](images/feature_correlation.png)

-------------

## Linear Regression

* Training:

  > * Mean absolute error = 240,457.84
  > * Mean squared error = 127,441,167,125.65
  > * Median absolute error = 172,839.44
  > * Explain variance score = 0.42
  > * R2 score = 0.42

* Residuals plot:

![residual plot](images/residuals_train.png)

* Training Plot:

![Training Plot](images/linear_regression.png)

* Testing:

  > * Mean absolute error = 234,554.68
  > * Mean squared error = 123,912,975,078.46
  > * Median absolute error = 169,628.39
  > * Explain variance score = 0.44
  > * R2 score = 0.44

* Residuals plot ():

![residual test](images/residuals_test.png)

* Test Plot:

![Test Plot](images/linear_regression_test.png)

-------------

## Applying Neural Network to predict Salary of player

* Initially just tried a simple DNN that used 3 Dense `Relu` layers and `msle` as log function, ran over 10,000 epochs, results are shown below:

![Loss Chart](images/log_network_graph.png)

* Then tried running multiple DNN's using the following loss Functions:

```python
loss_functions = ['mae', 'mse', 'mape', 'msle', 'huber', 'logcosh']
```

* Model features (`first_hidden` is 20% of the numbers of rows in `X_train`):

```python
def build_and_compile_model(loss):
  model = keras.Sequential([
      layers.Dense(first_hidden, activation='relu', input_shape=[X_train.shape[1]]),
      layers.Dense(first_hidden//4, activation='relu'),
      layers.Dense(first_hidden//16, activation='relu'),
      layers.Dense(first_hidden//32, activation='relu'),
      layers.Dense(first_hidden//64, activation='relu'),
      layers.Dense(1, activation='linear')
  ])

  model.compile(loss=loss,optimizer=tf.keras.optimizers.Adam(0.0001),
                metrics=['mae'])
  return model
```

* Results of Training over 500 epochs:

```python
mae had a final val_loss of 202289.53125

mse had a final val_loss of 142236286976.0 # Squared error: 377,142.26

mape had a final val_loss of 68.57567596435547 # Percentage

msle had a final val_loss of 154.00787353515625 # Log error

huber had a final val_loss of 219148.109375

logcosh had a final val_loss of 201331.84375
```

* `Log_cosh` ends up slightly edging out the with it's final val_loss over mae

![mae](images/mae_network_graph.png)

![log_cosh](images/logcosh_network_graph.png)

* In practice it seems that these models consistently predict about `7 times less` than actual for your average player & up to `18 times less` for those outlier players with a **super max** deal

-------------

## Who shall we test with?

-------------

## Conclusions

* Without doing things like **clustering**, identifying **salary limitations** of the team that the player is on and **removing outliers** it's a bit hard to make a super accurate prediction
* A DNN will make a more accurate prediction than simple linear regression, however for most players it's really not going to make a reasonable difference

## References

* Used functions to create DataFrames from this [Towards DataScience Article](https://towardsdatascience.com/sports-reference-api-intro-dbce09e89e52)

* Players that are not currently playing do not have contract data, but can find contracts using [spotrac](https://www.spotrac.com/nba/)

-------------

## If only I had more time...

* Cluster NBA players into different positional categories based off season stats, then train Neural Network to predict something like win percentage (or perhaps have it categorize into something like [`Great Team`, `Good Team`, `Okay Team`, `Bad Team`, `Awful Team`])
  * Unfortunately the results I was getting using `KMeans Clustering` don't make any sense to me. Tried using both *career totals*, *per game averages* and *scaling the data*, but KMeans was suggesting between 2-3 clusters & decided that wouldn't make for a good proof of concept, hence the pivot to salary predictions
  * Regardless, here are some Scree Plots I'd created using `PCA`:

![PCA](images/pca_graph_minmax.png)

* And one of many Horizontal Bar Charts of the most common suggestions of clusters

![clusters](images/number_of_clusters_standard.png)
